so this is um an interview with the
difference I'm the bassist that a
picture's worth a thousand words what I
what I did was ask Villa Melinda to dig
out from their archive some images that
would help explain some of what they've
done and you know do do a few things
that way so we're gonna start here
Melinda
when and where was this and who is that
handsome man next to you big glasses
this is an Africa our very first trip
the first time we either of us had ever
been to Africa in the fall of 1993 we
were already engaged to be married we
married a few months later and this is
the trip where we really went to see the
animals and to see the Savannah it was
incredible bill had never taken that
much time off from work but what really
but what really touched us actually were
the people and and the extreme poverty
we started asking ourselves questions
does it have to be like this and at the
end of the trip we went out to Zanzibar
and took some time to walk on the beach
which is something we've done a lot
while we were dating and we'd already
been talking about during that time that
the wealth that had become from
Microsoft would be given back to society
but it was really on that Beach Walk
that we started to talk about well what
might we do and how might we go about it
so given that this vacation led to the
creation of the world's I guess the
world's biggest private foundation it's
pretty expensive as vacations go I mean
which of you was the key instigator here
or was it symmetrical well I think we
were excited that there'd be a phase of
our life where we'd get to work together
and figure out how to give this money
back you know at this stage it was we
were talking about the poorest and what
could you have a big impact on them
where there are things that weren't
being done there was a lot we didn't
know our naivete is is pretty incredible
when we look back on it but
we had a certain enthusiasm that that
would be the the phase the the post
Microsoft phase would be our our
flattened
yeah which bill always thought was gonna
come after he was sixty so hasn't quite
hit sixty yet so some things change
along the way oh it started there but it
got accelerated that was so that was
ninety three and then it was it was
ninety seven orally before the
foundation itself started yeah ninety
seven we read an article about died real
diseases killing so many kids around the
world and we kept saying to ourselves
well that can't be in the US you just go
down to the drugstore and so we started
gathering scientists and started
learning about population learning about
vaccines learning about what had worked
and what had failed and that's really
when we got going was in late 1999 1988
1999 so you've got a big pot of money
and a world full of so many different
issues how on earth do you decide what
to focus on well we decided that we'd
pick two causes whatever the biggest
inequity was globally and there we
looked at children dines children not
having enough nutrition to ever develop
and countries that were really stocked
because that with that level of death
and parents would have so many kids that
they get huge population growth and that
the kids were so sick that they really
couldn't be educated and lift themselves
up so that was our global thing and then
in the US both of us have had amazing
education and we saw that as the the way
that the US could live up to its promise
of equal opportunities by having a
phenomenal education system and the more
we learn the more we realize that we're
not really fulfilling that promise and
so we picked those two things and
everything the foundation does are
focused there so else to each of you to
pick an image that that you like the
illustrates your work and Melinda this
was this is what you've picked what's
this about
so I one of the things I love to do when
I travel is to go out to the rural areas
and talk to the women whether it's
Bangladesh India lots of countries in
Africa and I go in as a Western woman
without a name I don't tell them you
know who I am
pair of khakis and I kept hearing from
women over and over and over the more I
traveled I want to be able to use this
shot I would there be there to talk to
them about childhood vaccines and they
would bring the conversation around -
but what about the shot I get which is
an injection they were getting called
deep Rivera which is a contraceptive and
I would come back and talk to global
health experts and they'd say oh no
contraceptives are stocked in in the
developing world we had to dig deeper
into the reports and this is what the
team came to me with which is to have
the number one thing that women tell you
in Africa they want to use stocked out
more than 200 days a year explains why
women were saying to me I walked 10
kilometres without my husband knowing it
and I got to the clinic and there was
nothing there
and so condoms were stocked in in Africa
because of all the aids work that the US
and others supported but women will tell
you over and over again I can't
negotiate a condom with my husband I'm
either suggesting he has AIDS or I have
AIDS and I need that tool because then I
can space the births of my children and
I can feed them and have a chance of
educating them Melinda your Roman
Catholic and you've often been embroiled
in controversy over this issue and on
the abortion question on both sides
really how do you navigate that yeah so
I think that's a really important point
which is we had backed away from
contraceptives as a global community we
knew that 210 million women were saying
they wanted access to contraceptives
even the contraceptives we have here in
the United States and we weren't
providing them because of the political
controversy in our country and to me
that was just a crime and I kept looking
around trying to find the person that
would get this back on the global stage
and I finally realized I just had to do
it and even though I'm Catholic
I believe in contraceptives just like
most of the Catholic women the United
States who report using contraceptives
and I shouldn't let that controversy be
the thing that holds us back we used to
have consensus in the United States
around contraceptives and so we got back
to that global consensus and actually
raised two point six billion dollars
around exact
this issue for women
no this is your broth what's this about
yeah well my graph has numbers on it I
really like this graph this is the the
number of children who died before the
age of five every year and what you find
is you know really a phenomenal success
story which is not widely known that we
are making incredible progress we go
from 20 million not long after I was
born to now we're down to about 6
million so this is a story largely
vaccines smallpox was killing a couple
nine kids here that was eradicated so
that got down to zero measles was
killing a couple million a year that's
down to a few hundred thousand anyway
it's this is a chart where you want to
you know get that that number to
continue and it's going to be possible
using science of new vaccines getting
the vaccines out to kids we can actually
accelerate the products last decade that
numbers dropped faster than ever in
history and you know so I just love the
fact that you can say okay if we can
invent new vaccines we can get them out
there use the very latest understanding
of these things and get the delivery
right that we can perform a miracle I
mean you do the math on this and it
works out I think that literally
thousands of kids lives saved every day
compared to the prior year it's and it's
not reported you know an airliner with
200 plus you know deaths ISM far far
bigger story then than that does that
drive you crazy
yeah it's because it's a silent thing
going on it's a kid one kid at a time
you know this 98% of this has nothing to
do with natural disasters and yet
people's charity when they see an
abscess are wonderful it's incredible
how people think okay that could be me
and that the money flows these causes
have been a bit invisible now that the
Millennium Development Goals various
things are getting out there we are
seeing some increased generosity and so
you know the goal is to get this well
below a million which should be possible
in our lifetime maybe it needed someone
who is turned on by numbers and graphs
rather than
the big sad face - to get engaged
I mean you've used it in your letter
this year you used basically this
argument to say that aid contrary to the
current meme that a you know aid is kind
of worthless and broken but actually it
has been effective yeah well people can
take that there is some aid that was
well-meaning and didn't go well you know
there's some venture capital investments
that were well-meaning and Dinko well
that you shouldn't just say okay because
of that you know because we don't have a
perfect record this is a bad endeavor
you should look at you know what was
your goal how are you trying to uplift
nutrition and survival and literacy so
these countries can take care of
themselves and say wow this is going
well and be smarter we we can't spend
aid smarter it is not all a panacea we
can do better than metric capital I
think you know including big hits like
this the traditional wisdom is that it's
pretty hard for married couples to work
together now have you guys managed it I
really don't think I could work with my
husband I just wouldn't work out um you
know we enjoy it and we don't this
foundation has been a coming too for
both of us at its continuous learning
journey and we don't travel together as
much for the foundation actually as we
used to and Bill was working at
Microsoft we have more trips we're
traveling separately but I always know
when I come home Bill's gonna be
interested in what I learned whether
it's about women or girls or something
new about the vaccine delivery chain or
this person that is a great leader he's
gonna listen and be really interested
and he knows when he comes home even if
it's to talk about the speech he did or
the data what he's learned I'm really
interested and I think we have a really
collaborative relationship but we don't
spend every minute together that's for
sure
[Laughter]
but now you are and we're very happy -
you are I mean early on you you were you
were basically largely running the show
six years ago I guess bill came on
full-time so I moved from Microsoft and
became full-time that must have been
hard adjusting to that now yeah I think
I think actually for the foundation
employees there was a there was way more
arcs for them than the rest for me about
Bill coming I was actually really
excited I mean bill made this decision
even obviously before it got announced
in 2006 and it was really his decision
but again it was a beach vacation where
we were walking on the beach and he was
starting to think of this idea and for
me the excitement of bill putting his
brain and his heart against these huge
global problems these inequities to me
that was exciting yes the foundation
employees had asked about that three
months once he was there including some
of the employees what you guys argue
about like you know Sunday 11 o'clock
you're away from a you know what what
comes up what's the argument you know
because we built this thing together
from the beginning it's this great
partnership you know I I had that with
Paul Allen in the early days of
Microsoft I had it with Steve Ballmer as
Microsoft got bigger and now Melinda in
an even stronger equal ways is the
partner so we talked a lot about which
things should we give more to which
groups are working well you know she's
got a lot of insights she'll sit down on
the employees a lot will take the
different trips she described so there's
a lot of collaboration I can't think of
anything where one of us had a you know
super strong opinion but you know about
one thing or another how about you
Melinda though can you never know well
we well here's the thing we comment
things from different angles and I
actually think that's really good so
bill can look at the big data
and say I want to act based on these
global statistics for me I come at it
from intuition I meet with lots of
people on the ground and Bill's taught
me to take that and read up to the
global data and see if they match and I
think what I've taught him is to take
that data and meet with people on the
ground to understand can you actually
deliver that vaccine can you get a woman
to accept those polio drops in her
child's mouth because the delivery piece
is every bit as important as the science
so I think it's been more a-coming to
over time towards each other's point of
view and quite frankly the work is
better because of it
so I mean in fact seeds in polio and and
so forth you have some amazing successes
what about failure though can you talk
about a failure and maybe what you've
learned from it
yeah poor chily we can afford a few
failures because we've certainly had
them we do a lot of you know drug work
or vaccine work that you know you're
you're gonna have different pills like
we put out one that got a lot of
publicity was asking for a better condom
well we got hundreds of ideas maybe a
few of those will work out we were very
naive certainly I was about a drug for a
disease in India visceral leishmaniasis
that I thought once we got this drug we
can just go wipe out the disease well
turns out it took an injection every day
for ten days it took three more years to
get it than we expected and then there
was no way it was gonna get out there
fortunately we found out that if you go
kill the sandflies you probably can have
success there but we spent five years
you could say wasted five years and
about 60 million on a path that turned
out to have very modest benefit when we
got there you're spending like a billion
dollars a year in education I think
something like that any any there's
anything I mean the story of what's gone
right there is quite a long and complex
one
are there any failures that you couldn't
talk about well I would say a huge
lesson for us out of the early work is
we thought that these small schools were
the answer and small schools definitely
helped they bring down the dropout rate
they have less violence and crime in
those schools but the thing that we
learned from that work and what turned
out to be the fundamental key
is a great teacher in front of the
classroom if you don't have an effective
teacher in the front of the classroom I
don't care how big or small the building
is you're not going to change the
trajectory of whether that student will
be ready for college so um Melinda this
is you and your eldest daughter Jenny
Jenny yeah and just taking three about
three weeks ago I think so four weeks
ago where was this so we went to
Tanzania Jen's been to Tanzania all our
kids have been to Africa quite a bit
actually and we did something very
different which is we decided to go
spend two nights in three days with a
family ahna and cenar er the parents
they invited us to come and stay in
their boma actually the goats had been
there I think living in that particular
little Hut on their little compound
before we got there and we stayed with
their family and we really really
learned what life is like in rural
Tanzania and the difference between just
going and visiting for half a day or you
know three-quarters of day versus
staying overnight was profound and so
let me just give you one explanation of
that they had six children and as I
talked to on in the kitchen we cooked
for about five hours in the cooking Hut
that day and as I talked to her she had
absolutely planned in space with her
husband the births of their children he
was a very loving relationship this is a
Maasai warrior and his wife but they had
decided to get married they clearly had
respect and love in the relationship
their children their six children the
two in the middle were twins 13 a boy
and a girl named Grace and when we go
out to chop wood and do all the things
that Grace and her mother would do grace
was not a child she was an adolescent
but she wasn't an adult she was very
very shy so she kept wanting to talk to
me and Jen we kept trying to engage her
but but she was shy and at night though
when all the lights went out in rural
Tanzania there was no moon that night
the first night and no stars and Jen
came out of our Hut with her rei little
headlamp on grace went immediately and
got the translator came straight up to
my Jenny said when you go home can I
have your headlamp so I can study at
night Wow and her dad had told me how
afraid he was that unlike the son who'd
passed a secondary exams because of her
she'd not done so well and wasn't in the
government school yet he was he said I
don't know how I'm gonna pay for her
education I can't pay for private school
and she may end up on this farm like my
wife so they know the difference in an
education can make in a huge profound
way I mean this is another pic of your
other two kids Rory and Phoebe along
with poor farmer bringing up three
children when you're the world's richest
family seems like a social experiment
without much prior art how have you
managed it what's been your approach
well yeah I'd say overall it the kids
get a great education but you've got to
make sure they have a sense of their own
ability and what they're gonna go and do
you know our philosophies been you know
to be very clear than most the money's
going to the foundation and you know
help them find something they're excited
about we want to strike a balance where
they have the freedom to do anything but
not sort of a lot of money showered on
them so that they they could go out and
do nothing and so far they're you know
fairly diligent excited to you know pick
their own directions
I mean you've obviously you know you've
got it the privacy carefully for obvious
reasons I'm curious why you've given me
permission to show this picture now here
at Ted
well it's interesting as they get older
they so know that our family belief is
about responsibility that we are in an
unbelievable situation just to live in
the United States and have a great
education and we have a responsibility
to give back to the world and so as they
get older and we are teaching them they
have been so many countries around the
world they're saying you know we do want
people to know that we believe in what
you're doing mom and dad and it is okay
to show us more so we have their
permission to show this picture and I
think Paul Farmer is probably going to
put it eventually and some of his his
work but they really care deeply about
the mission of the foundation too I mean
you've easily got enough money to spot
your vast contributions to the
foundation to make them all billionaires
is that your plan for them nope no they
won't have anything like that day they
need to have a sense that their own work
is is meaningful and important
and you know we read an article long
actually before we got married where
Warren Buffett talked about that and
we're quite convinced that it wasn't a
favor either to society or to the kids
well speaking of Warren Buffett
something really amazing happened in
2006 when somehow your only real rival
for richest person in America suddenly
turn around and agreed to give 80% of
his fortune to your foundation how on
earth did that happen I guess it's a
long version of a short version of that
we've got time for this show all right
well warm was a close friend and he was
going to have his wife Susie give it all
away tragically she passed away before
he did and he's big on delegation and he
said we thought you know he's got
somebody who's doing something well and
you know it's willing to do it at no
charge maybe that's okay but we were
Sund you know we'd never orderly stunts
expected it and it it has been
unbelievable it's allowed us to increase
our ambition and what the foundation to
do quite dramatically I mean it's half
the resources we have come from Warren's
mind luring generosity I mean I think
you've pledged that by the time you're
done more than 95% of your wealth will
be given to the foundation yes and since
this relationship it's amazing
and recently you and Ann Warren have
been going around trying to persuade
other billionaires and successful people
to pledge to give what more than half of
their assets - for philanthropy how is
that going well we've got about 120
people who've now taken this Giving
Pledge the thing that's great is that we
get together yearly and talk about ok do
you hire staff what do you give to them
we're not trying to modernize it I mean
the beauty philanthropy is this
mind-blowing diversity people give to
some things we look and go wow and but
that's great that's the role of
philanthropy is to pick different
approaches you know including even in
one space like educationally we need
more experimentation but it's been
wonderful meeting those people sharing
their journey to philanthropy how they
involve their kids where they're doing
it differently and it's been way more
successful than we expected now it looks
like we'll just keep growing in size in
the in the years ahead
people telling how many people see that
other people are making change with
philanthropy I mean these are people who
have created their own businesses put
their own ingenuity behind incredible
ideas if they put their ideas and their
brain behind philanthropy they can
change the world and they start to see
others doing it and saying wow I want to
do that with my own main to me that's
the piece that's incredible it seems to
me it's it's it's actually it's really
hard for some people to figure out even
what how to remotely spend that much
money on on something else I mean there
there are probably some billionaires in
the room and certainly some successful
people
I'm curious can you make the pitch
what's the pitch well it's the most
fulfilling thing we've ever done and you
know you can't take it with you and if
it's not good for your kids you know
then let's get together and brainstorm
about you know what what can be done the
world is a far better place because of
the philanthropists of the past and the
US tradition here which is the strongest
is the envy of the world and parlours
done so optimistic is because I do think
philanthropy is is going to grow and
take some of these things government's
just not going to work
and discovering and and shine some light
in the right direction the world's got
this terrible inequality growing
inequality problem that seems structural
it does seem to be that if more of your
peers took the approach that you two
have made you would make a dent in both
in that problem and certainly in the
perception of that problem it's not a
fair comment oh yeah if you take from
the most well teen you give to the least
wealthy it it's good tries to balance
that and that's that's John said you
change systems I mean in the u.s. we're
trying to change the education system so
it's just for everybody and it works for
all students I mean that to me really
changes the energy ability balance
that's the most important well I really
think that most people here and many
millions around the world just in awe of
the trajectory or lives are taken and
the the spectacular degree to which you
have shaped the future thank you so much
for coming thank you thank you
thank you
good job